Question: Biomechanical and wound healing characteristics of corneas after excimer laser keratorefractive surgery: is there a difference between advanced surface ablation and sub-Bowman's keratomileusis?

Context: To describe the biomechanical and wound healing characteristics of corneas after excimer laser keratorefractive surgery. Histologic, ultrastructural, and cohesive tensile strength evaluations were performed on 25 normal human corneal specimens, 206 uncomplicated LASIK specimens, 17 uncomplicated sub-Bowman's keratomileusis (SBK) specimens, 4 uncomplicated photorefractive keratectomy (PRK) specimens, 2 uncomplicated advanced surface ablation (ASA) specimens, 5 keratoconus specimens, 12 postoperative LASIK ectasia specimens, and 1 postoperative PRK ectasia specimen and compared to previously published studies. Histologic and ultrastructural studies of normal corneas showed significant differences in the direction of collagen fibrils and/or the degree of lamellar interweaving in Bowman's layer, the anterior third of the corneal stroma, the posterior two-thirds of the corneal stroma, and Descemet's membrane. Cohesive tensile strength testing directly supported these morphologic findings as the stronger, more rigid regions of the cornea were located anteriorly and peripherally. This suggests that PRK and ASA, and secondarily SBK, should be biomechanically safer than conventional LASIK with regard to risk for causing keratectasia after surgery. Because adult human corneal stromal wounds heal slowly and incompletely, all excimer laser keratorefractive surgical techniques still have some distinct disadvantages due to inadequate reparative wound healing. Despite reducing some of the risk for corneal haze compared to conventional PRK, ASA cases still can develop corneal haze or breakthrough haze from the hypercellular fibrotic stromal scarring. In contrast, similar to conventional LASIK, SBK still has the short- and long-term potential for interface wound complications from the hypocellular primitive stromal scar.

Answer: Ophthalmic pathology and basic science research show that SBK and ASA are improvements in excimer laser keratorefractive surgery compared to conventional LASIK or PRK, particularly with regard to maintaining corneal biomechanics and perhaps moderately reducing the risk of corneal haze. However, most of the disadvantages caused by wound healing issues remain.
